Created SQL Server Documentation for both metrics and logs (#1702)
SigNoz/signoz.io: data/docs/integrations/sql-server.mdx

---
date: 2025-07-16
id: sql-server
title: SQL Server Metrics and Logs
description: Integrate the SQL Server Receiver to scrape metrics and send logs to SigNoz
---

## Overview

> This documentation explains how to collect SQL Server metrics using the OpenTelemetry [SQL Server receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver) and logs using [File Log Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/filelogreceiver) and send them to SigNoz for monitoring and analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This documentation explains how to collect SQL Server metrics and logs using OpenTelemetry and send them to SigNoz for monitoring and analysis.
```

## Prerequisites

- Ensure a Microsoft SQL Server instance (any supported version) running.

## Setup

<Tabs entityName="plans">
<TabItem value="signoz-cloud" label="SigNoz Cloud" default>

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="metrics" label="Metrics" default>

### Step 1. Setup OTel Collector
The OpenTelemetry (OTel) Collector helps collect telemetry data such as logs, traces and metrics from your application.
Please follow the documentation [here](https://signoz.io/docs/tutorial/opentelemetry-binary-usage-in-virtual-machine/) to setup the OpenTelmetry Collector in your VM.

> Make sure to use the latest OTel Collector release. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The doc that we have hyperlinked has the latest tested version of OTel.

### Step 2. Setup SQL Server Receiver

> Update the `config.yaml` file that you created in `otelcol-contrib` folder while setting up OTel Collector to include the `sqlserver` receiver under the `receivers` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the `config.yaml` file that you created in `otelcol-contrib` folder while setting up OTel Collector to include the `sqlserver` [receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver) under the `receivers` section.
```

    receivers:
      sqlserver:
        collection_interval: 60s
        datasource: "Server=<ServerName>;User Id=<UserID>;Password=<Password>;Database=<DatabaseName>"
        metrics:
          sqlserver.cpu.count: 
            enabled: true
          sqlserver.database.backup_or_restore.rate:
            enabled: true
          sqlserver.database.count:
            enabled: true
          sqlserver.database.tempdb.space:
            enabled: true
          sqlserver.database.io:
            enabled: true
          sqlserver.database.latency:
            enabled: true

    processors:
      resource:
        attributes:
          - key: service.name
            value: <service-name>
            action: insert

    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: ingest.<region>.signoz.cloud:443
        headers:
          signoz-access-token: <SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY>
      debug:
        verbosity: detailed

    ```

- `<ServerName>`: Specifies the address or hostname of the SQL Server instance you want to connect to (e.g., localhost or myserver.database.windows.net)
- `<UserID>`: Specifies the SQL Server login name used for authentication (e.g., SA or any other configured SQL login)

> - `<Password>`: Specifies the password corresponding to the provided UserID, allowing access to the database.
> - `<DatabaseName>`: Specifies the target SQL Server database that the OpenTelemetry Collector will query for collecting metrics (e.g., master, mydb).
> - `<service-name>`: Specifies the service that emits the metrics, making it easier to identify and filter metrics related to a specific database.
> - `<region>`: Your chosen [region](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/overview/#endpoint) for SigNoz Cloud.
> - `<SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY>`: Your SigNoz Cloud [Ingestion Key](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<Password>`: Specifies the password corresponding to the provided UserID, allowing access to the database
- `<DatabaseName>`: Specifies the target SQL Server database that the OpenTelemetry Collector will query for collecting metrics (e.g., master, mydb)
- `<service-name>`: Specifies the service that emits the metrics, making it easier to identify and filter metrics related to a specific database
- `<region>`: Your chosen [region](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/overview/#endpoint) for SigNoz Cloud.
- `<SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY>`: Your SigNoz Cloud [Ingestion Key](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/)
```

### Step 3. Add SQL Server Receiver to pipelines
In the `config.yaml` file, under the `service` section, locate the `pipelines` block. Within the `metrics` pipeline, add `sqlserver` to the list of receivers.

    ```yaml:/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml
    ...
    service:
      pipelines:
        metrics:
          receivers: [sqlserver]
          processors: [resource]
          exporters: [otlp,debug]
    ...
    ```

### Step 4. Run the OTel Collector
Inside `otelcol-contrib` folder, run the `otelcol-contrib` command if you're using Linux based. For Windows based, use `otelcol-contrib.exe`

    ```bash
    ./otelcol-contrib --config config.yaml

>     ```

Reviewer: Create two tabs - Linux and Windows, and add run commands for each under respective tabs.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="logs" label="Logs" default>

<Admonition type="note" title="Limited Log Collection via SQL Server Receiver">

>   If you configure the <code>sqlserver</code> receiver, it will collect logs only related to <strong>expensive queries</strong>. <br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you configure the <code>sqlserver</code> receiver (see metrics tab for setup steps), it will collect logs only related to <strong>expensive queries</strong>. <br />
```

  For other types of logs (e.g., error logs, audit logs), use the <code>filelog</code> receiver to tail log files directly from the file system.
</Admonition>

### Step 1. Setup OTel Collector
The OpenTelemetry (OTel) Collector helps collect telemetry data such as logs, traces and metrics from your application.
Please follow the documentation [here](https://signoz.io/docs/tutorial/opentelemetry-binary-usage-in-virtual-machine/) to setup the OpenTelmetry Collector in your VM.
Make sure to use the latest OTel Collector release. 

### Step 2. Setup FileLog Receiver

> Update the `config.yaml` file that you created in `otelcol-contrib` folder while setting up OTel Collector to include the `filelog` receiver under the `receivers` section.

Reviewer: Add another sentence to mention about the type of logs we will collect. For example -> Audit, error etc.

- `<service-name>`: Specifies the service that emits the metrics, making it easier to identify and filter metrics related to a specific database.
- `<region>`: Your chosen [region](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/overview/#endpoint) for SigNoz Cloud.
- `<SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY>`: Your SigNoz Cloud [Ingestion Key](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/).

### Step 3. Add FileLog Receiver to pipelines
In the `config.yaml` file, under the `service` section, locate the `pipelines` block. Within the `logs` pipeline, add `filelog` to the list of receivers.

    ```yaml:/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml
    ...
    service:
      pipelines:
        logs:
          receivers: [filelog]
          processors: [resource]
          exporters: [otlp,debug]
    ...
    ```

### Step 4. Run the OTel Collector
Inside `otelcol-contrib` folder, run the `otelcol-contrib` command if you're using Linux based. For Windows based, use `otelcol-contrib.exe`

    ```bash
    ./otelcol-contrib --config config.yaml

>     ```

Reviewer: Same as metrics tab comment

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='self-host' label='Self-Host'>

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="metrics" label="Metrics" default>

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="logs" label="Logs" default>

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Validate Metrics in SigNoz

<Admonition>
💡 Not all metrics are scraped from SQL Server when running on Linux. For complete metric collection, including Windows-specific counters, use a Windows-based SQL Server.
</Admonition>

> - The following default metrics and optional metrics are scraped and can be viewed under the `Metrics` tab in the SigNoz UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view the SQL server metrics in the [Metrics Tab](https://signoz.io/docs/metrics-management/metrics-explorer/) of your SigNoz UI.
```

<Figure src="/img/docs/integrations/microsoft-sql-server/MetricsSQLServer.webp" alt="SQL Server Metrics" caption="Scraped Metrics from SQL Server" />

> - Refer this [link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver/documentation.md) for more info on metrics.

Reviewer: Add this link to the Metrics tabs.

> - Refer this [link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver/documentation.md) for more info on metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see the complete list of metrics, refer this [link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver/documentation.md).
```

## Validate Logs in SigNoz

> - The following default logs are ingested and can be viewed under the `Logs` tab in the SigNoz UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view the logs in the [Logs Tab](https://signoz.io/docs/product-features/logs-explorer/) of SigNoz UI.
```

<Figure src="/img/docs/integrations/microsoft-sql-server/LogsSQLServer.webp" alt="SQL Server Logs" caption="Ingested Logs from SQL Server" />

> - Refer this [link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver/logs-documentation.md) for more info on metrics.

Reviewer: Add this section to logs tab.

> - Refer this [link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver/logs-documentation.md) for more info on metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see the complete list of logs, refer this [link](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/sqlserverreceiver/logs-documentation.md).
```
